# README: BERKSTATS
Stats and R crashcourse: materials and code examples.

## Syllabus

**Berkman Klein Center**

**Statistics and R Crash Course**

**February 2017**
**Rey Junco & Ulrich Matter**
                                 

**Course Description/Rationale**

The primary purpose of this course is to provide a fundamental
statistics background to understand and critically evaluate empirical
research literature in the social sciences and to conduct your own
professional research. We will take a hands-on approach in teaching both
statistics and the R open source programming language for statistical
computing.

This course is structured to apply material on basic statistical methods
in the social sciences to hands-on exercises in solving relevant
research problems. We will make use of real-world data, assisted by
course supplements on MyStatLab. We will conduct most of the work for
this course during the class meetings; however, the online materials
will be useful to help students further develop their understanding of
statistical concepts.

**Course Objectives**

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be better able
to:

- Define a research problem

- Recognize the difference between correlational and experimental research designs

- Understand basic statistical concepts and apply them to quantitative data

- Effectively utilize R to conduct basic statistical analyses

- Critically evaluate statistics-based research

**Texts**

Bennett, J. O., Briggs, W. L., & Triola, M. F. (2014). Statistical
reasoning for everyday life (4th

> edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education. **This text is
> available online for free on MyStatLab for a two-week period. **

**Course Supplement**

Students are required to create an account on Pearson’s MyStatLab. There
is a **two-week free trial** period that should suffice for this course.


**Software Requirement **

Please bring your laptops with R and R-Studio already installed:

1.  Install R [here](https://cran.cnr.berkeley.edu/)

2.  Install R-Studio [here](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/#download)

3.  Once you have it all installed, open R-Studio and try to run some of
    the code examples given [here](https://rawgit.com/umatter/Berkstats/4ca478a3be60a5e4190cd45c3b302daa0cc7fbe8/Berkstats.html)

**Class Schedule**

Monday, February 20 (1 pm – 3 pm)

Wednesday, February 22 (1 pm – 3 pm)

Friday, February 24 (1 pm – 3 pm)

Meeting Location: Berkman Klein Center Conference Room

**METHODS AND ACTIVITIES**

Because learning statistics requires a great deal of practice over time,
we will be adopting a *flipped course* model whereby students engage in
*content* learning outside of class time and both *content and*
*process* learning during class time. In class meetings, we will spend a
great deal of our time learning and practicing statistics. In addition,
students will be expected to work on building their statistical
knowledge outside of class via the MyStatLab course supplement.

***Out-of-Class Work***

**Pearson MyStatLab Quizzes:** Students are asked to successfully
complete online quizzes of the reading material on the MyStatLab
website. The due dates for the quizzes are listed on the course outline.

**Pearson MyStatLab Homework:** Students are asked to complete homework
assignments on the MSL website. The due dates for these assignments are
also available on the course outline.

**Readings**

Required readings for each class meeting are listed in the course
outline. Students should complete these readings prior to the class
meeting.

**Course Outline**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Date         Topic                                          Assignment
  --------- -- ------------------------------------------- -- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  2/20/17      Introduction to Social Science Research        Bennett et al.: Chapters 1-5
                                                              
               Introduction to R                              **Homework 1-4**
                                                              
               Sampling                                       **Chapter 1-5 Quizzes**
                                                              
               Measures of Central Tendency                   
                                                              
               Measures of Variability                        
                                                              
               The Normal Distribution                        

                                                              

  2/22/17      Standardization and z Scores                   Bennett et al.: Chapter 6
                                                              
               Standard Errors                                **Homework 5-9**
                                                              
               Statistical Significance                       **Chapter 6 Quiz**
                                                              
               Effect Sizes                                   
                                                              
               Confidence Intervals                           

                                                              

  2/24/17      Correlation                                    Bennett et al.: Chapters 7-10
                                                              
               t-tests                                        **Homework 10-12**
                                                              
               ANOVA                                          **Chapter 7-10 Quizzes**
                                                              
               Different types of ANOVA                       
                                                              
               Linear Regression                              

                                                              -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
